
I would turn that into a project I’d call something like Agent Microkernel Runtime.

The central idea would be:

The model should not be the operating system.

A lot of harnesses effectively give the model a giant menu containing filesystem functions, Git functions, web functions, database functions, browser functions, subtasks, memory functions, planning functions, etc., then ask it to orchestrate everything. That wastes context and makes the nondeterministic component responsible for decisions that ordinary software could make more reliably.

Your runtime would deliberately expose a tiny stable interface to the model while moving complexity behind deterministic runtime boundaries.

Conceptually:



                    ┌─────────────────────┐
                    │        Model        │
                    │                     │
                    │ sees ~3-6 primitives│
                    └──────────┬──────────┘
                               │
                        capability request
                               │
                 ┌─────────────▼─────────────┐
                 │       Agent Kernel         │
                 │                            │
                 │ capability resolution      │
                 │ permissions / budgets      │
                 │ scheduling                 │
                 │ context management         │
                 │ state + event log          │
                 └─────────────┬──────────────┘
                               │
                  lazy capability activation
                               │
       ┌──────────────┬────────┴────────┬─────────────┐
       ▼              ▼                 ▼             ▼
    filesystem       git              shell          MCP
     adapter        adapter            runner        adapters

The model might initially know only something equivalent to:



search_capabilities(query)
invoke(capability, args)
inspect_result(id)

Not:



read_file
read_files
read_file_range
search_file
search_files
grep
glob
list_directory
get_file_metadata
write_file
patch_file
replace_file
...

That distinction is the project.

Anthropic describes essentially the underlying problem: tools should have distinct purposes, overlapping tools can confuse models, and tool responses should minimize context consumption. Their more recent work also discusses dynamic discovery when agents have access to hundreds or thousands of tools.

But just implementing search_capabilities() isn't enough for your portfolio. OpenAI already has deferred tool search, so “I invented lazy tools” won't distinguish you.

What would distinguish you is treating it as a runtime systems project.

I would build these pieces:

Lazy capability loading. Tools exist as manifests outside the prompt. The runtime indexes name, semantic purpose, input/output types, permissions, expected cost and side effects. Only selected capability definitions enter model context.

Capability-based security. An agent doesn't simply “have shell.” A run gets something like filesystem:/repo/**:rw, network:github.com:read, or process:cargo:test. Tools cannot escalate beyond the capability granted to the run.

Out-of-process tools. Run dangerous or unreliable tools in worker processes rather than inside the agent runtime. Communicate over a narrow IPC protocol. Crash a tool without crashing the agent.

Deterministic event log. Every model response, capability lookup, tool invocation, result, timeout and state transition gets an ordered ID. You can replay an execution without rerunning side effects.

Budget-aware execution. Put explicit limits on model tokens, tool-result tokens, wall-clock time, process time, network bytes and number of actions.

Result handles instead of context dumping. A 20 MB compiler log doesn't go into the LLM context. The runtime stores it and returns metadata plus a handle. The model can query slices, search it or summarize portions.

Cancellation / retries / idempotency. Treat tool execution like a proper distributed system rather than await tool().

Dynamic context assembly. Construct every inference context from required state rather than accumulating an indefinitely growing transcript.

Trace viewer. Not a giant SaaS dashboard—just enough to visualize model → capability → execution → result and show token/cost/timing statistics.

MCP compatibility at the edge. Let MCP tools plug into your capability layer, but don't make MCP concepts your kernel abstractions.

The capability system is particularly interesting. Instead of a registry like:



std::unordered_map<std::string, Tool> tools;

you could represent something more like:



Capability
    id
    namespace
    description
    input_schema
    output_schema

    permissions
    side_effects

    estimated_latency
    estimated_context_cost

    executable

Then your resolver has an actual optimization problem:



task
 ↓
candidate capabilities
 ↓
permission filtering
 ↓
relevance ranking
 ↓
cost filtering
 ↓
small working capability set

That starts looking like runtime engineering rather than LLM glue.

The other part I would emphasize heavily is context virtualization.

Think of the model's context window almost like scarce address space. Files, terminal output, documentation, old reasoning, tool schemas and previous results exist outside it. The harness maps information into the active context only when necessary.

You could have:



Artifact store
├── file:392
├── shell-output:981
├── diff:114
├── web-result:441
└── compiler-errors:552

Instead of feeding this:



[17,000 tokens of compiler output]

you feed:



Build failed.

artifact://compiler-errors/552
312 errors
first_error: src/runtime.cpp:418
categories:
    template: 189
    unresolved-symbol: 73
    warning-as-error: 50

The model then asks:



inspect(
    artifact="compiler-errors:552",
    query="first 20 root errors"
)

That is a genuinely interesting systems abstraction.

And it gives you something very important that several of your existing projects already have:

numbers.

Do not benchmark your harness with “it feels less bloated.” Build an experimental comparison.

Have perhaps 50, 100, 250 and 500 available tools and compare:



                    Eager       Lazy kernel
Tools available       250           250
Schemas in context    250             5
Initial tokens      42,180         2,940
Tool errors           11%            4%
Median turns          8.3            6.9
Task success          71%           79%
Median latency       18.2 s         14.1 s

Those are illustrative numbers, not expected results. Your actual results are the project.

Measure at least task success, schema tokens exposed, total tokens consumed, wrong-tool selections, redundant calls, wall-clock latency, and capability-search overhead.

Even better, create adversarial tests where tools deliberately overlap:



github.search
github.search_code
github.search_repositories
github.search_commits
filesystem.search
filesystem.grep
filesystem.find
workspace.search
...

Then compare models when all definitions are visible versus your resolver exposing only the appropriate subset.

That's a publishable little systems/ML experiment.

It also gives you a very strong demo. Imagine running:



$ microagent run "Find the bug causing the H.264 chroma corruption
                  and produce a minimal patch."

and then:



available capabilities: 327

loaded initially: 3
  workspace.search
  artifact.inspect
  capability.search

discovered:
  source.read
  git.diff
  process.cmake-build
  process.test

model turns:       7
tool calls:       13
schemas exposed:   7 / 327
context peak:     21,440 tokens
raw tool output:   4.8 MB
model-visible:    31 KB

result: patch produced
tests: 147/147 passed

Now the project communicates itself immediately.

It would also fit unusually well beside your existing work. Your résumé currently says, in effect:



GPU runtime
ML inference runtime
weight streaming runtime
self-healing runtime
codec
CPU
embedded real-time system

Then adding:



Agent Execution Runtime

makes sense.

You're not suddenly becoming someone who built a LangChain clone. You're applying your recurring theme—resource management, execution machinery, constrained systems and runtime architecture—to agents.

I would therefore avoid building the fashionable parts: elaborate multi-agent personas, vector-database “memory,” twenty integrations, drag-and-drop workflow builders, prompt-template systems, huge configuration files, built-in RAG abstractions, dozens of agent classes, or a web UI as the primary achievement.
Adapters and integrations don't count.

I’d build the Agent Microkernel Runtime in the attachment, with one change to the order of work: make it recoverable before making it clever. For a task that runs for hours or days, the decisive question is what happens when the process dies after an external action but before its result is recorded.

The research supports that emphasis. Lazy tool discovery already exists in commercial platforms, so discovery alone is a weak distinguishing claim. Long-running agent experiments also show that compaction alone does not prevent lost progress or premature claims of completion; explicit work lists and handoff records help. Durable workflow systems rely on recorded execution history, while retryable external actions still need idempotency.

The project I would aim to demonstrate

A small, capability-oriented agent runtime that can resume multi-hour work after interruption, expose only relevant tools and evidence to the model, and account for every action.

Keep the model-facing interface close to the brief’s proposal: search_capabilities, invoke, and inspect_result, plus a way to finish or report that work is blocked. The runtime handles scheduling, permissions, storage, retries, and context assembly. Selected tool schemas enter a model call only when needed.

The important distinction is that the prompt is disposable; the run is durable. A new process or context window should be able to reconstruct the next useful step from stored state.

Runtime workflow
Start a run. Store an immutable task request, workspace reference, granted capabilities, budgets, model configuration, and acceptance criteria. Give the run a stable ID. A client can disconnect and later use status, attach, or cancel.
Choose bounded work. Maintain a durable list of milestones with evidence required to mark each complete. Give the model one tractable work item at a time. This addresses the observed tendency to attempt everything at once or declare victory early.
Assemble context. Build each model request from the task contract, current work item, verified decisions, a small set of recent events, relevant capability schemas, and artifact references. Do not append the entire lifetime transcript.
Record before acting. Persist the model response and proposed invocation. Validate its arguments and permissions, assign an operation ID, and record the operation as pending before dispatching it.
Execute outside the kernel. A worker performs the action with a deadline and resource limits. Store bulky output as an artifact; record a concise result and its handle. The model can inspect a slice or search the artifact when necessary.
Checkpoint and continue. Persist the result, update milestone state, and construct the next context. When context becomes crowded, write a structured handoff containing decisions, unresolved questions, next action, and pointers to supporting evidence. Anthropic’s long-running harness work used explicit progress artifacts for continuity across sessions.

Recovery is a separate path, not simply “retry everything.” On startup, the runtime finds operations whose outcome was never recorded. It can safely rerun an idempotent operation using the same key, query an external system for its outcome, or mark a non-idempotent operation as outcome unknown and pause it for reconciliation. Recording an intent cannot by itself guarantee that an external action happens exactly once; Temporal’s activity guidance makes the same distinction for retries.

For very long histories, keep the ordered audit log but load a recent snapshot plus subsequent events for recovery. Archive older detail rather than forcing every resume to reread the entire run.

Build order
StageDeliverableExit test		
1. Define the experiment	Task set, eager-tool baseline, metrics, and a written failure model	A baseline run can be reproduced before optimizing it
2. Durable vertical slice	Rust CLI, one model adapter, SQLite run/event store, artifact store, one worker, run/status/resume/cancel	Kill the process at several points; a run resumes without losing recorded progress
3. Lazy capabilities	Versioned manifests, permission filtering, a simple lexical or BM25 resolver, schema activation	Relevant tools can be found among overlapping names without exposing the whole registry
4. Context virtualization	Artifact inspection, token budgets, structured checkpoints, evidence-backed milestone state	A long run crosses several context resets and retains the information needed to finish
5. Execution controls	Worker isolation, enforced filesystem and network scopes, timeouts, cancellation, recovery policies	A rejected action cannot be performed by invoking an adapter directly
6. Compatibility and evaluation	MCP adapter, trace viewer, benchmark runner, documented results	Repeatable comparison against baseline, including interrupted runs

I would use SQLite in WAL mode with an explicit durability setting for the first local version, plus content-addressed artifacts. SQLite documents that WAL with synchronous=NORMAL can lose a committed transaction after power loss, whereas FULL provides the stronger durability needed for this claim. Write and sync an artifact before committing the database reference to it; a cleanup pass can remove unreferenced artifacts after a crash.

A worker process gives fault isolation, but process separation alone is not a security boundary. Capability manifests should be reviewed runtime policy, with filesystem and network restrictions enforced where the action actually executes. Treat descriptions and annotations from an MCP server as untrusted; the current MCP specification explicitly cautions against trusting tool annotations from untrusted servers.

MCP belongs at the edge. Its current specification has an optional Tasks extension for tools that return durable asynchronous handles; the kernel must still own the overall run and its recovery.

Evaluation that would make the project convincing

Use the same tasks, model, budget, and tool implementations across four configurations: eager schemas; lazy discovery; lazy discovery plus artifact-backed context; and the full durable runtime. Test both ordinary tool selection and multi-hour tasks with large outputs and forced restarts.

Measure completion against external acceptance tests, wrong-tool choices, invalid arguments, model-visible schema tokens, total tokens, wall time, discovery overhead, duplicate side effects, and recovery time. Vary registry size and include deliberately overlapping tools. Report paired results and uncertainty, including cases where an eager registry cannot fit within the context limit. No target percentage should appear in the README until measured.

The strongest demo would start a repository repair task, interrupt it during a build or external call, restart the runtime, and show which action was recorded, how its outcome was reconciled, what evidence entered the new context, and whether the final patch passed its tests. That demonstrates a runtime for long-running work, rather than a tool-search wrapper.

First concrete step: write the run-state and operation-state contracts, three crash scenarios, and a small baseline evaluation set. Those decisions determine the storage and worker interfaces; implementing a resolver before them would risk optimizing the least consequential part of a long-running system.

this. the ui im striving for is a basic agent harness ui - in the cmd like codex or claude code or grok



I would not build a traditional full-screen dashboard first. The important UI principle should be:

The terminal is a client of the durable runtime, not the runtime itself.

That matters because your whole project is about recoverability. If the terminal crashes, SSH disconnects, or the user closes it, the run should continue or remain resumable from persisted state.

A clean architecture would be:

┌───────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│                 terminal client               │
│                                               │
│  rendering / input / attach / detach          │
└─────────────────────┬─────────────────────────┘
                      │ local IPC
                      ▼
┌───────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│                 agent runtime                 │
│                                               │
│ run state                                     │
│ event log                                     │
│ model orchestration                           │
│ context assembly                              │
│ capability resolver                           │
│ operation recovery                            │
└─────────────────────┬─────────────────────────┘
                      │
              ┌───────┴────────┐
              ▼                ▼
          workers           storage

Then the ordinary interaction can be extremely simple:

$ arun

Agent Runtime
workspace: ~/src/h264
model: ...
run: 8f29c1

> Find the cause of chroma corruption and fix it.

● Inspecting repository
  searched 41 files

● Reading decoder/chroma.cpp
● Reading decoder/prediction.cpp

● Running tests
  146 passed, 1 failed

● Editing decoder/chroma.cpp
  +12 -4

● Running tests
  147 passed

✓ Completed
  Fixed incorrect chroma interpolation at frame boundaries.

> _

That is enough.

Where your UI becomes interesting is when the runtime machinery appears naturally in the transcript.

For example, capability discovery:

● Finding capability for repository search

  workspace.search
  estimated cost: low
  permission: read

● Searching repository

Normally you might even collapse the discovery step and display only:

● Searching repository

But a debug mode can expose:

/capabilities

available: 327
loaded this turn: 4

workspace.search
workspace.read
process.run
artifact.inspect

That gives you a clean everyday UX while still letting someone inspect what your microkernel is doing.

Recovery is where this UI could become substantially more impressive than another agent shell.

Imagine this:

$ arun attach 8f29c1

Restoring run 8f29c1...

✓ checkpoint loaded
✓ 184 events replayed
✓ 7 artifacts restored

! Interrupted operation detected

  op:       process-192
  command:  cargo test
  started:  14:32:18
  outcome:  unknown

● Reconciling operation

  worker process no longer exists
  operation is safe to repeat

● Re-running cargo test

Or the more difficult case:

! Interrupted operation detected

  op:       github-031
  action:   create_pull_request
  outcome:  unknown
  retry:    unsafe

● Checking external state

✓ Existing pull request found
  operation reconciled without replay

That single demo says more about the project than a fancy web UI.

I would make the CLI commands roughly:

agent
agent run "task..."
agent attach <run>
agent status <run>
agent list
agent cancel <run>
agent inspect <run>
agent replay <run>

Inside an interactive session, keep slash commands limited:

/status
/tasks
/context
/tools
/artifacts
/trace
/checkpoint
/cancel
/help

Don't add 40 slash commands. That would ironically recreate the bloat you're criticizing.

I would also distinguish between three kinds of output visually:

● agent/runtime action
│ tool output
✓ verified result
! runtime/recovery warning

For example:

● Building project

│ [ 72%] Building CXX object decoder.cpp.o
│ [100%] Linking decoder_tests

✓ Build succeeded in 3.8s

Large output gets virtualized:

● Running benchmark

✓ Process exited successfully
  output: 18.7 MB
  artifact: process-output:81ad

  summary:
    1,200 configurations evaluated
    best: wg=128 tile=16x16

Then:

> show me the top 10 configurations

The model invokes inspect_result against that artifact instead of stuffing 18 MB back into context.

That connects your UI directly to the underlying research idea.

I would also expose context accounting in a compact footer:

────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
8f29c1  ctx 18.4k/128k  tools 4/327  $0.42  00:18:37
> _

Or perhaps:

ctx 18k │ artifacts 7 │ tools 4/327 │ ops 23 │ checkpoint 12s ago

This is useful because your project is specifically about controlling model-visible resources.

For long-running work, the task view matters more than a “thinking” pane:

/tasks

[✓] Understand decoder pipeline
[✓] Reproduce chroma corruption
[✓] Identify failing interpolation path
[→] Implement boundary fix
[ ] Run reference-vector suite
[ ] Validate against FFmpeg output

Each completed item should have evidence attached internally:

[✓] Reproduce chroma corruption
    evidence:
      artifact:test-output:93
      artifact:frame-diff:44

That makes “done” an actual runtime concept instead of something the model claims.

One design decision I think would improve this substantially: make the normal terminal UI scrollback-oriented, not an alternate-screen application.

In other words, don't make it look like htop.

Let output remain in the user's terminal history:

agent message
tool call
tool result
agent message
...
> prompt

That gives you normal copy/paste, shell history behavior, SSH friendliness, and less UI complexity.

You can still use raw terminal control for multiline input, spinner updates, keyboard shortcuts, and repainting the prompt area. Crossterm is designed for cross-platform terminal control, including input events, cursor movement and screen manipulation.

If later you want /trace to open a richer full-screen inspector, then Ratatui is a reasonable fit; its current releases use Crossterm as the default backend.

So I might have:

agent                  # normal scrollback UI

agent trace 8f29c1     # full-screen optional TUI

And the trace UI could be:

┌─ Run 8f29c1 ─────────────────────────────────────┐
│ 184 events │ 23 operations │ 7 artifacts         │
├──────────────┬────────────────────────────────────┤
│ Events       │ Operation                          │
│              │                                    │
│ 180 model    │ process.run                        │
│ 181 invoke   │ cargo test                         │
│ 182 result   │                                    │
│ 183 model    │ status: succeeded                  │
│>184 checkpoint                                    │
│              │ duration: 3.81s                    │
│              │ exit: 0                            │
│              │ artifact: 81ad...                  │
└──────────────┴────────────────────────────────────┘

That's useful tooling, but it isn't what people have to stare at for normal agent interaction.

I'd also make Ctrl-C semantics carefully defined:

Ctrl-C once       cancel current operation
Ctrl-C twice      interrupt current model turn
Ctrl-D            detach from run
agent cancel ID   cancel entire durable run

The important word is detach.

Closing the frontend shouldn't mean “destroy everything.”

You could demonstrate:

$ agent run "refactor the renderer and run the entire test suite"

run: a81f...

● Inspecting renderer
● ...

^D
detached from a81f...

$ exit

Later:

$ agent attach a81f

Attached to a81f...

Since detach:
  14 operations completed
  3 files changed
  418 tests passed
  current task: benchmark renderer changes

● Running benchmark...

That is exactly the kind of thing that makes the project feel like a real execution runtime.

Internally I'd separate the Rust crates/modules something like:

crates/
  kernel/
      run.rs
      operation.rs
      event.rs
      recovery.rs
      scheduler.rs

  context/
      assembler.rs
      checkpoint.rs
      artifact.rs
      budget.rs

  capability/
      registry.rs
      resolver.rs
      policy.rs

  worker/
      protocol.rs
      supervisor.rs
      process.rs

  storage/
      sqlite.rs
      artifact_store.rs

  model/
      provider.rs
      protocol.rs

  cli/
      input.rs
      render.rs
      commands.rs

  tui/
      trace.rs

Notice that cli/ should be near the edge.

The kernel should know nothing about:

println!()
ratatui
terminal width
keyboard events
ANSI colors

It should emit structured events:

enum RuntimeEvent {
    ModelStarted { turn: TurnId },
    ModelCompleted { turn: TurnId },

    CapabilityResolved {
        capability: CapabilityId,
    },

    OperationStarted {
        operation: OperationId,
    },

    OperationCompleted {
        operation: OperationId,
        artifact: Option<ArtifactId>,
    },

    CheckpointCreated {
        checkpoint: CheckpointId,
    },

    RecoveryRequired {
        operation: OperationId,
        reason: RecoveryReason,
    },

    RunCompleted {
        result: ArtifactId,
    },
}

The terminal merely decides:

RuntimeEvent::OperationStarted
         ↓
"● Running tests"

That architecture also makes a future GUI, remote client, or JSON mode trivial without polluting the core.